Task 5: Submarine communications (latency)
SUBMARINE NETWORK PROJECT 0.1
Submarine communications
-	Different use cases
-	- Technologies & requirements
Challenges for underwater communication
-	physical limitations
Communications inside Submarine
-	Underwater Wi-Fi
-	- 2.4 Ghz VS 5 Ghz 
-	- Signal penetration reflections and absorption
-	Protocols
Outbound communications
-	Ultrasound Cellular Network
-	Underwater challenges for Cellular
-	Roaming
-	Protocols
-	Multiplexing technique
-	- FDMA (Frequency Division Multiplexing Access) 
In FDM every user is operating in different frequency. All frequencies 
can travel at the same time across the medium. 
-	- TDMA (Time Division Multiplexing Access)
In TDM every user is operating in same frequency, but they are divided in 
different time slots so they appear to work parallel. 
-	- CDMA (Code Division Multiplexing Access)
In CDMA several users can use same medium and frequency at the same time. 
Users are separated with unique codes. 
-	Cellular technologies 3GPP
-	- GSM (Global System for Mobile communication)
-	- GSPS (General Packet Radio Services)
-	- CDMA (Code Division Multiple Access)
-	- 3G (Third Generation)
-	- 4G (Fourth Generation)
-	- 5G (Fifth Generation)
-	- Pros & Cons of different technologies




Submarine communications

-Cellular networks

--History of mobile network:
Fist generation (1G) mobile technology such as NMT enabled users to carry
phone without cable connect to it. There were two major problems in this.
Connection used analog signals to transfer data to receiver. That was
errorprone way to transfer data because analog signal is more sensitive
to interference than digital signal. Other problem was that First
generation used FDMA (Frequency Division Multiple Access) modulation
technique to reserve frequency from base stations, which reserved
available spectrum inefficient way.
        NMT (Nordiska MobileTelefongruppen) first used frequency band
of 450MHz but when capacity was running out 900MHz frequency band was
introduced in many countries to NMT use.

Second generation (2G) mobile technology such as GSM, CDMA and EDGE used
modulation techniques as TDMA and CDMA. 2G also introduced data service
(50Kbps) and internet browsing.
        GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications) first used
frequency band of 900MHz but when capacity was running out 1800MHz
frequency band was introduced in many countries to GSM use. Also, 850MHz
and 1900MHz was introduced to use in some countries. Mainly in USA. So,
frequency bands 850MHz, 900MHz, 1850MHz and 1900MHz was used in GSM.

Third generation (3G) mobile technology such as WCDMA and HSPA was
focused to give higher data transfer speed and increased bandwidth
(2Mbps). Higher data speed allowed to use GPS and videocalls. In 3G were
Used WCDMA (Wideband Code Division Multiple Access). 3G was a great step
moving from basic phone to smartphone.
        HSPA (High-Speed Packet Access) has few standards itself HSDPA
(High Speed Downlink Packet Access), HSUPA (High Speed Uplink Packet
Access) and HSPA+ (HSPA Evolved). HSPA used almost same frequency bands
than GSM. Used frequency bands were 850MHz and 1900MHz.

Fourth generation (4G) mobile technology such as WiMAX data speed 20-
100Mbps was suitable for high resolution speed movies and television.
This higher speed was made possible modulation technique OFDMA
(Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access) and antenna technique
MIMO (Multiple Input Multiple Output). MIMO uses multiple antennas inside
to communication both end devices and base stations.
        WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access) used frequency band of 20 GHz - 66 GHz and data speed can be up to 75 Mbps.

Fifth generation (5G) data speed is esimated to be 10Gbps. 5G uses enchanced MIMO technology and millimeter wawes. It will support seamless connectivity to support the internet of things such as driverless cars and smart homes. 5G frequ>

Thoughts how this information helps us planning underwater connections
The lower the used signal frequency is the farther signals travel. Underwater signal won't traver so far than air that means we cannot directly compare signal travel lenght underwater and in air but the principle is the same.

The higher the used signal frequency is the bigger transmission capacity is.

The better the coding in signal multiplexing technique and better antenna technique is used the better quality, reliability and more capasity in signal is.

--Roaming

	
--Different use cases
Submarine networking and communications can be divided for internal use 
inside the ship and outbound use, which includes all outbound connections 
and transmissions from the ship.

--Submarine Internal Use
Internal connections can be used for gathering data from sensors all 
around the submarine and for communications within the vessel’s crew. 
Sensors doesn’t need high bit rates, voice communication and data 
transfers from the crew are high priority and need high data rate.

---Systems and sensors
Internal network is used for data from sensors and access control 
devices. Sensors can send data directly with UDP-protocol and access 
control devices would work with UDP- and TCP-protocols. TCP-protocol for 
access control is chosen over UDP because user can get confirmations 
about sent data. Sensors are continuously updating data about state of 
submarine and its premises. Vessel have control room and server premises 
for all data gathering and monitoring.

---Internal Communication
Internal network for crew communications is done by wire, network is 
wired mainly by optical fiber. Fiber is chosen over copper because 
submarine have tight spaces for wiring and wiring can be done next to 
power cables with fiber (power cables can cause noise for copper cables). 
Internal communication could be done by Wi-Fi also, but it needs wired 
core network in every section of submarine. Wi-Fi coverage can be 
achieved by adding access points to every section of vessel.

---- Wi-Fi for submarine and it’s challenges
Wi-Fi network is fast and decently reliable to use for fixed size of 
area, but it comes with great challenges as we talk about submarine use. 
Vessel is divided into many sections and it forces to have minimum one 
access point per section and all of them connected by wire. Even if all 
of vessel’s sections would be open and powerful Wi-Fi antennas are in 
use, sections can act as faraday cage and block connection between 
sections. While Wi-Fi could be more flexible to use inside submarines 
sections, wired connection would be still preferable choice due to its 
reliability.

-Outbound communications 
Outbound communications are used to communicate with other vessels and 
joining to global network. Data is transferred mostly by cellular 
networks, but also Wi-Fi can be used in close range transfers.

--Communication with other vessels
Communicating with other vessels is important in many ways. Communicating 
with other vessel we could use message-based systems with for example 
techniques like SMS (Short Message Service) or anything like that. SMS is 
widely used in mobile devices. SMS are used in techniques like GSM. 
Benefit to use low radio waves in submarine is that low frequency traffic 
is transported in water better than high frequency traffic. 
Another communicating type could be internet calls like VoIP and 
videocalls. VoIP and videocalls could be used when there are important 
negotions in the dock between submarines where there are better 
connections to other vessels. Long distance calls we could use for 
example low frequency calls directly to other vessels or via base station

It is important that submarine knows other vessels position, estimated 
route and status. In example radar could terminate position of other 
vessels. Radar sends radio waves and waits it to echo back and counts the 
position of other vessels. Radar could use both TCP and UDP protocols 
based from the application requirements. Some radar systems can tolerate 
packet loss and reordering packets. Then vessel could use UDP based 
design in vessel’s system. Using UDP-based positioning system is more 
precise and faster determining positions, on the other hand if you 
application do not tolerate packet loss or reordering packets then you 
must use TCP-based design. Benefits to use TCP-based system is that it 
won't consume so much resources because fewer number of packets are 
transferred but determination of positioning and estimated route takes 
more time that UDP-based system.

Systems that are used for communicating another vessels and radar systems 
are critical traffic from a submarine perspective. Those two types of 
communication are important that they have on frequency which they 
operate. Congested frequency could cause packet loss, delay, jitter and 
loss of signal.

Submarines could use multi-path technologies to gain higher data rates in 
close connections. Faster network can be achieved by summarizing two 
technologies together as multi-path. Submarines could use low frequency 
Wi-Fi antennas and cellular technologies at same time while communicating 
between ships or base stations. When vessel is out of Wi-Fi range vessel 
will only communicate through cellular network and send only necessary 
packets. Default choice for network are cellular technologies and Wi-Fi 
as secondary.

--Communication with cellular network
Basically, almost all communication from submarine is going throw base 
stations for example cellular networks. In exceptions you could think 
examples radar systems and communication systems that are used to 
communicate straight to vessel-to-vessel.
If there comes such a time. Dystopia or utopia and there comes need to 
implement cellular network in the ocean there is important that that 
cells have decent connection to each other. There must be adequate signal 
to other cells that users(submarines) won't suffer from connections bad 
quality that could cause packet loss, jitter, and packet delay. 

There are many cellular technologies which can be used in cellular 
networks. For example, you could think using GSM, GPRS, CDMA, EDGE, UMTS, 
3G, 4G, 5G technologies. One main thing to remember is that in water low 
frequency travels better so high frequency techniques have much shorter 
distance than in air. 
Multiplexing techniques such as FDM, TDM and CDMA enables users to 
communicate at the same time using same channel.
		

-- Cellular networks for submarine communication
Cellular networks are easy way to transfer huge amounts of data in mobile 
environment. Cellular technologies, fourth generation (4G) and fifth 
generation (5G) are in common use and reliable on land, but it doesn’t 
give much for underwater use. Newest high data rate cellular technologies 
use high frequencies with low effective range and tight mesh network. Due 
to physics of radio waves in water, high frequencies have extremely low 
range in water environment and are not effective to use. Seawater does 
have great absorption and is very conductive for high frequencies which 
makes low frequencies more commonly used.  






